Fair warning, might stretch your brain
a little bit if you're not super familiar
with the notions of recursion,
if that's newer to you.
It's another one of those stretch
your brain things, but it really is
actually the same concept as what we've
seen before already a couple of times,
which is take a bigger problem and
divided down into smaller problems.
Almost all recursion is like that.
If I asked, the countPaths function takes
as its first input the starting digit and
as its second input
the number of hops to take.
So if I called countPaths(4,6),
what I'm asking
is how many possible paths
can I take starting from 4,
where my path length is 6,
my hopCount is 6?
Technically, I guess the path length
would be 7 since the hops are 6, okay?
How many paths can I take of length
7 where I've taken six possible hops?
That's what is being asked.
So how could we break this
down into smaller problems?
If you pull up on your screens a picture
of the dial pad, you can tell me
what are the three possible digits
that I could go to from the digit 4?
Somebody say them out loud,
what are the three digits that
I can get to from the digit 4?
>> 3, 9, and 0.
>> 3, 9 and 0.
So we could say that
the number of places that I
could get to from 4 with
a hopCount of 6 is exactly
equal to the number of
places that I could get to
from 3 with a hopCount of 5,
whatever that is.
Plus the number of places that I could
get to from 9 with a hopCount of 5,
whatever that is, plus the number of
places that I could get to from 0 with
a hopCount of 5, whatever that is.
Whatever those three things are,
if you add them up,
they have to be equal to
whatever countPaths(4, 6) is.
There's a mathematical leap that I'm
asking you to make, that some of you,
that will be an easy leap, and others, you
will be like, whoa, I don't believe that.
But I want you to spend a moment
if you are doubting that,
look at that path and
convince yourself that it has to be true,
because there's nowhere else that we could
go from 4 other than to go to 3, 9, and 0.
So this has to be accounting for
all of those possible paths.
Again, we referenced this
earlier in the course.
This is one of those fundamental
principles that when you study
something like discrete math,
you just start getting really good at.
You start getting almost this spider
sense intuition of, I know that
this is equal to that,because it couldn't
possibly be divided any further.
There are no other options,
so it has to be this, or
the reverse of that has to be this.
We get these intuition points
from a study of discrete math, so
it is worth thinking about and
looking into, that's a good foundation for
a lot of your algorithmic work.
Now, we have not yet answered how do I
figure out what countPaths(3,5) is, (9,5),
or (0,5).
We haven't answered that yet.
We're gonna answer that in just a moment.
But whatever that answer is, do we now
agree that if I add those three numbers
together, that it has to give me
the answer to countPaths (4,6)?
If you're still doubting it,
just keep looking at that dial pad and
looking at the possible ways that
you could go, and convince yourself,
is there anything else that I would
need to account for other counts?
And hopefully, you'll eventually get that
light-bulb moment where you realize, yep,
this has to account for all of them.
So how would I answer the countPaths(3,
5)?
By the way,
these are what those actual numbers are.
The 168 possible paths that I can
take from digit 4 making 6 hops.
And here's the breakdown of those,
52, 52, and 64.
How do I figure out something
like countPaths(3,5)?
How I figure out countPaths(3,5) is I look
at all the places I can go from digit 3.
What are the places that
I can go from digit 3?
>> 4 and 8.
And I'm gonna take one fewer
hopCount from those places, right?
So starting from digit 4 with hopCount
of 4 and starting from digit 8
with hopCount of 4, the amount of paths
that I can do there has to be equal.
The two together have to
be equal to the (3, 5).
And so on, we could continue.
We could say (4, 4) would break down into
what its three constituent ones would be.
And countPaths would break down into
what its two constituent paths would be.
We could keep going until,
when would we stop?
When hop count was 0,
because there's nowhere else to go.
[LAUGH] We've made all the hops.
You follow me?
In other words,
if I were to call countPaths(3,0),
what should the return value be?
This is a very critical point.
Think to yourself, if I call
countPaths(3,0) starting from digit
3 with no hops,
how many possible paths are there?
>> 0.
>> There's only two rational answers,
0 or 1.
I'm going to suggest to you
why 1 is the right answer,
because if they were all 0s at the end,
we would never add anything up.
So we have to define the base
case as if I am on the key and
I can't move anywhere,
there is only one path for
me to take, which is to stay right put.
So we define that base case as 1.
If we define it as 0,
all of our math is gonna add up to 0.
[LAUGH] You follow me?
So we actually already now have the
constituent and it's not that much code.
We already have the constituent pieces
that we need to be able to calculate this.
We have the constituent pieces, because
we see the recurrence relationship,
which is the countPaths of any starting
digit with a hopCount is equal to the 2 or
3 possible sub-countPaths
with one fewer hopCount.
That is the countPaths for all of my
reachable teams with one fewer hopCount.
And we know that the base case is
that when hopCount comes in as 0,
what do we do?
We return 1.
So from that conceptual basis alone,
we now have what we need
to be able to solve this.
I'm wanna give you one
further set of diagrams for
you to understand what's happening.
In this diagram that I'm about
to do that's gonna animate out,
f is the countPath, but
I just replaced countPath with f,
because there's a bunch of stuff and
I needed to save space, okay?
But when you see f(4, 6),
that means countPaths (4,6).
There are two kinds of ways that we could
traverse through all of the possible paths
to do the counting.
We've referred to these before.
We've referred to breadth-first and
depth-first.
You may have seen those terms before, but
this animation shows you
the difference in ordering.
So this would be a breadth-first traversal
through all of those possible counts.
And, You can see that
we are going to the leaf level and going
all the way through the possible leaves,
and then going to the next level and
checking out all of their leaves, and
then going to the next level and
checking out all of their leaves.
We are going wide before we go deep,
and that's why this is called
a breadth-first traversal.
But you see there that the countPath
(4.6) is the same thing.
I wish I had a red mouse cursor here.
But the countPath (4,6), this root node,
is the same thing as visiting
the countPath (3,5) plus
the countPath(9,5) plus
the countPath (0,5), who, in turn,
are the same thing as f(3,5) is the same
thing as visiting f(4,4) and f(8,4).
f(9,5) is the same thing as visiting
f(2,4) and f(4,4) and so on.
Does everybody see that?
This isn't an actual physical tree,
it's a conceptual tree for the call stack.
These are all the function calls
that we would make, recursively,
as we went through it.
Because counting addition is commutative,
it doesn't matter what order
we go through in this tree.
But that would be the breadth-first
traversal, is looking at all of those and
looking at all of those.
As it turns out, it's going to be much,
much easier to write
a depth-first computation of this,
far fewer lines of code.
So here's the animation for
the depth-first traversal.
By the way, we could write this, we would
write it as a for loop with a queue.
Breadth-first traversal is
an iterative for loop with a queue.
And I hinted at that when we talked about
the problem before, you remember, okay?
We're not gonna write that code, but
you could write a version of this with an
iterative and queue, it's just more work.
So the depth-first traversal looks
like this, look at where we go first.
We go from (4, 6) down to (3, 5),
down to (4, 4), down to (3, 3),
all the way down to the leaf.
And then we backtrack up and
then we go down to the leaves again and
then we backtrack up, and
we go down to the leaves again and so on.
And that's why you can see with
that animation that we're going
depth-first rather than breadth-first.
Both traversals would visit every node,
and
therefore both traversals would
make every function call,
and therefore the entire resolution of
this would be the same, which is 168.
These are two different ways of
conceptualizing the problem.
And it turns out that even though
they would both give the same answer,
one of them is drastically
easier to code than the other.
Follow me?
But they are isomorphic,
you could write them in either way,
since the recursion is gonna be
a lot easier, make a lot more sense.
So we're gonna do this
approach with recursion.
So hopefully you now are getting
enough of the sense of that,
that we can, Tackle writing
the recursive version of countPaths.
And while that was a lot of words for
me to describe the algorithm, it might
be somewhat anticlimactic that it's only
gonna be a handful of lines of code, okay?
Remember in recursion,
we always need a base case.
What was our base case?
What did I say we were going to simply
define as happening at some point?
>> Return 1 where there's no hops.
>> When the hopCount was 0,
we defined it as?
>> [INAUDIBLE] 1.
>> A path count of 1, right?
We just stay in place.
So if hopCount is 0, return 1.
I now need a variable
that I will increment.
I'll start it at 0, and
I'm gonna call this pathCount, and
that is going to be
the thing that I return.
Now, from a given starting digit,
how do I know which
nodes in the conceptual call
stack tree I need to visit?
What thing tells me
the answer to that question?
Given a starting digit of, say, 4,
how do I know where I need to visit?
I need to visit a certain
set of digits from what?
>> The reachable keys?
>> It's calling the reachable
keys function, yes, but
we don't even need to call
that function in this case.
We can literally just do
nearby keys of starting digit,
right, cuz they're the same thing.
Let's just skip the function call.
Yes, the JavaScript engine would probably
inline it, but there's no reason for
us to call it unnecessarily.
So if we were starting on digit 4,
then this loop would do three
different iterations, right?
It would do an iteration with 3, an
iteration with 9, and an iteration with 0.
And so digit would be 3, 9, and 0.
So you ready for the big reveal?
pathCount incremented by,
CountPaths with the digit
that we're looking at,
in this case, 3, 9, and
0, and hopCount -1.
So hopCount starts out at 6, and then on
the next recursive call stack, it's 5 and
then it's 4 and then it's 3.
And eventually, it gets to 0,
and what do we do?
>> Return.
>> We return 1.
I had to spend 15 minutes explaining
through slides and diagrams and
all kinds of complicated animations
that which only took us a grand total
of six lines of code to write.
Still, if you were presented
this problem in a job interview,
and you wrote those six
lines of code correctly,
I think it's probably an instant hire.
[LAUGH] Because 99.9% of people
would stare blankly at the screen,
they'd fumble around, and maybe eventually
get something kind of on the path.
But this illustrates how
important it is as a skill
that we engineers need that
we be able to think this way.
Because once I taught
you to think this way,
it didn't actually take much effort
to code that way, didn't it?
What was the real challenge?
Helping you to understand
the mental model, right?
If you can think algorithmically,
you can code algorithmically.
You follow me?
Let's test it.
Let's go back over to the browser,
refresh the page.
And we said that we wanted to take 6 hops,
and we wanted to start from 4,
and we know that the answer should be 168,
right?
Let's try, and
there we got our 168.